---
layout: 180blogpost
title: 180 steps at a time
subheading: How I came to care about cadence
excerpt: This is the custom excerpt taken from YAML front matter
heroimage: blog-metronome.png
---

# For intro post on 180 experience from presentation

Intro

I’d like to talk to you about running, specifically running cadence or steps per minute
Put your hand up if you do any running?
Put your hand up if you do any cycling, swimming or some other exercise?


*My running start & the concept*

I started running in January 2015. Like many middle aged people, I wanted to get some exercise and cling on to the last vestiges of youthful vigour.
I soon got into it, and after a few months of running I came across the idea that 180 steps per minute is the optimal running rhythm.

This originates in a <a href="http://running.competitor.com/2014/07/training/make-a-high-stride-rate-work-for-you_54957">study of middle distance runners at the 1984 Olympbics,</a> by coach Jack Daniels. He counted the stride rate of all the athletes running 800 metres or more, and found that all but one ran at least 180 steps per minute (and the one that didn't hit 176). Yet as a coach he had never come across a student above 180 steps. So the magic number of 180 steps per minute was born.


Like all research, there is further research which corroborates this and some which counters it. But what is generally agreed is that:

<ul>
<li>Running with a faster cadence can improve your performance and reduce the risk of injury</li>
<li>180 steps per minute is a great bar to aim for, but if it is too high start by measuring your cadence and aiming to increase it by 5 to 10%</li>
<li>Running with a consistent cadence is also important, and something top runners aim for. In the 2011 Boston marathon, Desiree Davila and Caroline Kilel both held a 180-190 rate as they battled to the finish, and there are countless more examples</li>
</ul>
<blockquote>Fitter people have a little longer stride, but the rate stays the same<br> - Jack Daniels, coach</blockquote>



<h2 class="section-heading">Putting the theory to the test</h2>

I'd read enough to be convinced it was worth a try. Using <a href="http://www.runkeeper.com">Runkeeper</a>, I found my previous runs were around 140 spm, and with the help of a metronome I started trying to increase them to 180…..it felt very weird
Baby steps + roadrunner cartoon
Let me demonstrate, concentrate on my legs here….
140 is like this:
180 is like this:
Less extension, less height, less impact

Benefits:
1.  Not as tired or achey
2.  Helped me go further
3.  Helped me go faster
4.  Easier to change direction and avoid puddles - or tourists randomly stepping out in front of you *without looking*

Needless to say, I heartily recommend it

*Take away*

So what I’d like you to do in the next few week is the following:
If you’re a runner, try 180 steps per minute, or failing that just try increasing cadence by 10% - it will help



And more on the theme:

THIS FOR BLOG:
Personally I tried increasing from 140 to 180. It felt strange at first but soon became a comfortable rhythm which not only felt faster but did help me actually go faster over longer distances without feeling as tired as with the longer strides from before. With shorter steps your legs gain less height - and therefore make less impact when hitting the ground - and legs and feet are not so extended when you hit the ground.
And the added bonus, with smaller strides it's easier to switch direction when someone randomly steps in front of you without looking.

The knees take less impact, and with smaller strides it's easier to switch direction when someone steps in front of you without looking.

We need a class here that gets this styling without being in a footer and div:
<p class="copyright text-muted"><i class="fa fa-creative-commons fa-fw"></i> photo by <a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/90353061@N00/">Charles B. Owen</a>.</p>
